---
title: "Negative Thinking (Anticipation)"
---

Despite the power of positive thinking, negative thinking is not always bad.
Instead it is a useful tool to improve the resilience of plans and can help to
prepare our responses to things that we can anticipate but are outside of our
control.

Negative thinking in this context does not refer to a downward spiral of
destructive thoughts. Here it refers to thinking about what could go wrong (aka
anticipating) and identifying the response to that scenario. There may not
always be a response. Sometimes it may be that if X happens, then the project
fails. That too is OK, and at least it is clear what the outcome and response,
or lack of a response is.

This approach is nothing new. Assessing risks and risk management in projects is
an example of negative thinking in practice in project management. But after
reading the chapter on negative thinking in Ryan Holiday'sÂ [The Obstacle Is The
Way](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Obstacle_Is_the_Way), I realised that the
concept can be applied to more than identifying project risks. It can be applied
to a much broader set of contexts including presentations, important meetings,
starting new habits, making decisions and so on.

**Presentations**: So, you've got this important presentation coming up. You've
polished the slides and rehearsed the script and you are ready. As you launch
into your first slide, someone interrupts and asks a question that derails your
flow. Even worse the question is asking about something that you have not
thought of. Panic! All that preparation has been for nothing. The rest of the
audience watch you try to formulate a response on the spot and recover the flow.
The spotlight is on you, and like a rabbit in headlights you are struggling to
think of an appropriate response because you don't think well on your feet. How
can this be avoided? Could negative thinking have helped identify the question
and an associated response? Could it have identified the situation and the
associated response? I think so.

**Meetings**: You have a meeting with your boss. You know that he is going to
bring up an issue that you have been avoiding or struggling to deal with. You
hope that she doesn't. But she does and your avoidance and hope have left you
without an appropriate response other than some waffle the you hope will make
them change the topic. This is avoidable. By embracing negative thinking and
anticipating the topic you can prepare some responses, and even responses to
questions on those responses.

Although there are a lot of things that could go wrong and out of our control,
we can anticipate many of them and control our responses to those things that
may or may not happen.
