---
title: "Mindmap Tips"
tags: [Productivity]
---

Mindmaps are incredibly useful for non-linear thinking and for organising high
level information, but if they become hard to navigate their value decreases.
Mindmaps may become hard to navigate if the map becomes too large or contains
too much detailed information. The tips below help to keep a mindmap navigable
and useful.

**Limit depth to 4 levels.** Depth here means the number of levels of branches
within branches within branches. The more levels that exist, the greater the
friction when deciding where to store or find a piece of information.

**Hard edges between nodes.** In this context, a hard edge is a clear boundary
between the information stored within each node. Overlapping nodes can also
increase friction when deciding where to store something in a mindmap. This
nicely complements the previous guide to minimise the number of levels in a
mindmap.

**Atomic notes.** [Atomic
notes](https://publish.obsidian.md/alexisrondeau/Atomic+notes) are notes the
focus on one topic and one topic only. Regularly refactoring a mindmap by
pruning topics into their own atomic mindmaps helps to keep the maps to a
manageable size and keeps each map focused on its own topic.

**Mindmaps as Maps of Contents.** A [map of
content](https://www.ideasnotebook.com/Map+of+Content), or MOC, is a curated
list of links or topics, similar to a table of contents or and index that
usually provides some context for grouping related links. A mindmap makes a
great MOC as it can lend its visual structure to the organisation and display
the topics within the MOC.

**Icons and Colours.** Part of the power of a mindmap is its visual aspect. Most
mindmaps have a unique shape. Use icons and colours to visually represent and
enhance information or regions within the mindmap.

**Mix in Linear Notes.** When using a mindmap, not everything needs to be a
mindmap. Detailed information is often better stored in a linear note which is
just a plain old note, either in a note box in the mindmap itself or in a
separate text file. Mixing mindmaps and linear notes, helps to use each to their
strengths - use the mindmap as the map of the contents and the linear notes for
the detailed information.
